6

Measuring Space:

Perimeter and Area

In  Fig.  6.1,  you  see
athletes  assembled  at
the start of a 4 × 100 m
relay  race.  The  tracks
are  laid  out,  and  the
athletes are all set to go
racing down the tracks.
Do  you  notice  that  the
athletes  are  not  at  the
same starting line?

Fig. 6.1: Athletes at the start of 4 × 100 m relay race

Those in the outer lanes seem to be starting ahead of those in the
inner lanes while the finish line is the same for all of them. What could
be  the  reason  for  this?  The  distance  between  the  starting  points  of
adjacent lanes is called the ‘stagger’. Notice that the stagger continues
all  the  way  to  the  outermost  lane.  Do  you  think  the  stagger  gives
anyone  (those  in  the  outer  lanes  or  in  the  inner  lanes)  an  unfair
advantage?  Why  or  why  not?  On  what  basis  can  the  organisers  work
out the length of the stagger between lanes?

Think and Reflect

In  my  school,  the  playground  is  too  small  to  have  a  400  m  track,  so  the
school  constructed  a  200  m  track  instead.  Does  this  mean  that  we  need
a  smaller  stagger  for  the  race  tracks  in  my  school  (i.e.,  smaller  than  the
stagger used in the Olympics), for the same 4 × 100 m relay race?

To  answer  the  question  about  the  lane  staggers  required  on  a
4  ×  100  m  athletics  track,  we  need  to  know  how  to  find  the  length
around a circle.

Chapter 6.indd   118
Chapter 6.indd   118

4/15/2026   3:02:30 PM
4/15/2026   3:02:30 PM

119

6.1 Perimeter of a Shape
Given  any  shape,  its  perimeter  is  the  total  length  around  its  border.
Imagine a tiny insect going for a walk around its border, never turning
around, till it returns to its starting point. The perimeter of the shape is
the total distance it travels.

So,  a  square  with  side
a units has perimeter 4a units.
An  equilateral  triangle  with
side  a  units  has  perimeter  3a
units.

a units

Fig. 6.2 A

a units

Fig. 6.2 B

The perimeter of a rectangle with length a units and width b units
is 2(a + b) units. Note that the formula for the perimeter of a square is a
‘special case’ of the formula for the perimeter of a rectangle with a = b.

r

Fig. 6.3

Here we see a circle with radius r units.
What is its perimeter? How do we find out?

Think and Reflect

What  is  the  connection  between  this  question  and  the  one  about  the
400 m athletics track?

To answer the question about the perimeter of the circle, we must

go step by step.

to

What  happens

the
perimeter  of  a  square  if  we
double
its  side?  It  doubles
too.  The  ratio  of  perimeter  to
the  side  is  4:1;  this  is  so  for
all  squares.  As  the  side  of  the
square gets larger (or smaller),
the  ratio  of  perimeter  to  side
stays fixed at 4:1.

side = 2 units

side = 4 units

perimeter = 8 units perimeter = 16 units

Fig. 6.4: Ratio of perimeter to side is 4:1

Chapter 6.indd   119
Chapter 6.indd   119

4/15/2026   3:02:30 PM
4/15/2026   3:02:30 PM

Measuring Space: Perimeter and Area120

For  equilateral  triangles,  the  ratio  of  perimeter  to  the  side  is  3:1.
As the side of the equilateral triangle gets larger (or smaller), the ratio
of perimeter to side stays fixed at 3:1.

C

D

C

D

C

D

Fig. 6.5

What about a circle? What is
its perimeter (usually called the
circumference)  in  terms  of  its
diameter?

Is the ratio of circumference
(C)  to  diameter  (D)  the  same
for circles of all sizes (Fig. 6.5)?
What do you think?

6.2 Perimeter of a Circle — The C/D Ratio

In  ancient  days  people  realised  that  the  ratio  of  the  circumference
to  the  diameter  of  the  circle  does  not  change  if  we  change  the  size
of the circle.

Let’s call this ratio the ‘C/D ratio’ of the circle.
What is the value of the C/D ratio?
How would you estimate this ratio?

HOME MEASUREMENT
You  can  do  a  simple  measurement  at  home  to  estimate  the  C/D  ratio.
Take  a  cotton  reel  with  thin  thread  around  it.  Measure  the  diameter D
of the reel as accurately as possible. Unwrap and then tightly wrap the
thread around the reel 20 times. Unwrap it again; measure its length L,

and calculate

   L
20 D

. This is the ratio we want. For accuracy, the thread

should be very thin. Please do the experiment! Do you get a ratio between
3 and 4? Between 3.1 and 3.2?

It  is  also  possible  to  estimate  the  C/D  ratio  using  pure  geometry,  i.e.,

without any  measurements at all! Can you imagine how?

C/D’s Adventurous Journey: From Ancient Approximations
to the Exact Formula of Mādhava

Mathematicians  have  been  fascinated  by  circles,  and  the  C/D  ratio,
since  ancient  times  and  across  geographical  regions.  This  constant,

Chapter 6.indd   120
Chapter 6.indd   120

4/15/2026   3:02:30 PM
4/15/2026   3:02:30 PM

Ganita Manjari | Grade 9 | Part I121

which  we  now  call  π  (we  say  ‘pi’  as  in  ‘pie’  and  not  as  in  ‘pizza’),
represents  a  bridge  between  many  different  areas  of  mathematics,
and connects the straight-edged world of polygons with the infinite
curves  of  nature.  While  early  civilisations  relied  on  practical,
ʻgood-enoughʼ values for construction and trade, the pursuit of this
ratio eventually became an important pastime of mathematicians that
helped to benchmark the sophistication of mathematical theories.

In  Mesopotamia  (c.  1900  BCE),  mathematicians  moved  beyond  the
crude integer value of 3. They realised that a circle had a perimeter that
was slightly larger than the hexagon inscribed within it. They concluded
that π should therefore be larger than 3, and they set the value of π to

be 3 +

1
8

 = 3.125.

r = 1

O

Fig. 6.6 The Mesopotamian Hexagon-to-Circle comparison.
Can you see why this shows that π > 3?

By 250 BCE, Archimedes of Syracuse brought a new level of rigor
to the problem. He ‘trapped’ the value of π between the perimeters of
inscribed and circumscribed polygons. By using both an inscribed and
circumscribed  hexagon,  Archimedes  showed  that  π  is  between  3  and
2 3 3 46⊕ .
 ≈ 3.46. Working his way up to 96-sided polygons, Archimedes found
10
71

< π < 3

that 3

1
7

.

a

a

r = 1
a

Fig. 6.7: Archimedes’ method utilising inscribed and  circumscribed
polygons. Can you see why this diagram of an inscribed and
circumscribed  hexagon tells us that π is between 3 and  2 3 ?
(Hint: Use the Baudhāyana–Pythagoras Theorem.)

Chapter 6.indd   121
Chapter 6.indd   121

4/15/2026   3:02:33 PM
4/15/2026   3:02:33 PM

Measuring Space: Perimeter and Area
122

3.14167 for π.

In  about  150  CE,  Ptolemy  of  Alexandria  refined  Archimedes
computations  for  use  in  his  astronomical  tables,  giving  the  ratio
377
120

 ≈
Shortly  thereafter,  in  China,  a  ‘circle-cutting  method’  of  Liu  Hui
(263  CE)  laid  the  ground work  for  two  breakthroughs  due  to
Zu Chongzhi (480 CE). Zu pushed the polygon approximation method
to 24,576 sides! He used this to discover the Yuelü (Approximate Ratio)

of

22
7

 ≈ 3.1428 for π, and also the Miü (Close Ratio) of
355
113

for π. The rational fraction

 is so close to π that it remained the most

355
113

 ≈

3.1415929

accurate value for π in the world for over 800 years; it is now known

that no single rational fraction with denominator less than 15,000 can
be as close to π as this fraction!

In  499  CE,  Āryabhaṭa  provided  a  value  of

62832
20000  =  3.1416  for  π.
Crucially,  he  described  this  value  as  asanna,  i.e.,  ‘approaching’  or
‘approximate’ —  a profound insight suggest ing that the ratio could not
be  given  exactly  as  one  simple  fraction.  Meanwhile,  Brahmagupta
(628 CE) suggested the use of the value  10  ≈ 3.1622 for π; while slightly
less  accurate,  he  chose  it  for  its  mathematical  elegance  and  the  ease
with which it could be manipulated in equations, a preference that saw
10   become  the  dominant  approximation  in  the  Arab  world  and

medieval Europe for centuries after.

Over  the  ensuing  years,  many  great  mathematicians  studied  π,
including its approximations; but no approximation was as accurate as
 , 3.1416, and  10  — until the

 —  or as algebraically simple as

Zu’s

355
113

22
7

work  of  Mādhava  of  Sangamagrāma,  who  changed  the  game  forever.
Mādhava  realised  that  π  was  not  just  a  number  to  be  approximated
by  fractions  and  other  finite  algebraic  expressions,  but  a  limit  to  be
reached. Mādhava thereby discovered the first exact formula for π:

π
4

 = 1 –

1
5
Is that not a beautiful formula? Mādhava’s formula — given in the
form  of  an  ‘infinite  series’ — was  a  tectonic  shift  for  mathematics.
By  moving  from  the  geometric  cutting  of  circles  to  the  analytical
summing  of  numbers,  Mādhava  birthed  the  area  of  mathematics

 + …

 +

 –

1
3

1
7

Chapter 6.indd   122
Chapter 6.indd   122

4/15/2026   3:02:34 PM
4/15/2026   3:02:34 PM

Ganita Manjari | Grade 9 | Part I

123

known  as  calculus.  His  infinite  series  enabled  him  to  calculate  π  to
11  decimal  places  (3.14159265358),  proving  that  the  relationship
between  a  circle’s  circumference  and  its  diameter  was  a  window
into an entirely new area of mathematics.

Better  and  better  infinite  series  were  developed  over  time
that  gave  more  and  more  digits  of  π  even  more  quickly.  The
key  breakthroughs  on  the  problem  after  Mādhava  were  due  to
Nīlakaṇṭha  (c.  1500),  Machin  (1706),  Ramanujan  (1914),  and  the
Chudnovsky  brothers  (1988)  who  skilfully  extended  the  ideas  of
Ramanujan. Today, using their algorithms, we now know π to neels
(100s  of  trillions)  of  digits!  We  will  learn  more  about  the  area  of
calculus in later grades.

In  1706,  the  Welsh  mathematician  William  Jones  used  the  Greek
symbol  π  to  denote  the  C/D  ratio,  because  π  is  the  first  letter  of
the  Greek  word  perimetros  for  perimeter.  The  symbol  was  made
popular  by  the  Swiss  German  mathematician  Leonhard  Euler
(pronounced ‘oiler’). We continue to use the same symbol today!

6.3 π Is Irrational

The  digits  of  π  go  on  forever,  with  no  visible  pattern.  You  already
know  that  fractions  give  rise  to  decimal  expansions  with  a  rhythmic
pattern, e.g.,
1
3

 = 0.142857 142857...

 = 0.09090909...,

 = 0.33333...,

1
11

1
7

But for π, there is no such pattern! It turns out that π cannot be
written as a ratio of two integers. Such numbers are called irrational.
Remember: A rational number is a number that can be written as a

 where a, b are integers with b not equal to 0, e.g., numbers

fraction

a
b
2
such as 1
3

 ,

–7
11

 and 1.4.

In  Grade  8,  you  learned  that

2   is  an  irrational  number.  From
their  writings,  it  seems  that  Āryabhaṭa  and  Zu  Chongzhi  regarded
π  as  irrational.  Centuries  later  (1761),  the  mathematician  Lambert
showed that this is so; π is irrational. But to prove this requires more
advanced mathematics, which we will learn much later.

Chapter 6.indd   123
Chapter 6.indd   123

4/15/2026   3:02:34 PM
4/15/2026   3:02:34 PM

Measuring Space: Perimeter and Area124

Since  π  is  irrational,  there  is  no  ‘best  fraction’  for  π.  If  there  is  any

fraction that is close to π, we can find another fraction that is closer.

The well-known fraction

22
7

 is good enough for most practical uses.

But it is important to note that π is not equal to

22
7

 (they are ‘close but

not equal’). So we write π ≈

22
7

 and also π ≠

22
7

. In the same way, we can

write  2  ≈ 1.414 and also  2  ≠ 1.414.

As noted earlier, a much better approximation for π is

355
.
113

Fun Fact

Here’s a fun way to remember the first few digits of π:

How I wish I could recollect pi.

Count the number of letters in each word (3, 1, 4, 1, 5, 9, 2) and you

get the digits of π! So, π ≈ 3.141592…

Since  π  ≈  3.14  and  also  π  ≈

22
7

  ,  March  14  (written  ‘3 - 14’  in  North

America) is celebrated each year as Pi Day, and 22 July (written ‘22-7’ in

Chapter 6.indd   124
Chapter 6.indd   124

4/15/2026   3:02:35 PM
4/15/2026   3:02:35 PM

Ganita Manjari | Grade 9 | Part IIndia) is celebrated each year as Pi Approximation Day.

6.4 Length of an Arc of a Circle

125

A

r

O

B

Fig. 6.8: Two semicircles making
a full circle

The  circumference  of  a  circle
of  diameter  d  is  π  d.  Since  the
diameter is twice the radius, we can
also  write  the  circumference  of  a
circle as 2πr, where r is the radius.
What  will  be  the  length  of  a
semicircle  with  the  same  radius  r
(see Fig. 6.8)?

If  we  reflect  the  circle  in  the
diameter  AB,  the  red  semicircle
and  the  blue  semicircle  exchange
places.  This  means  that  they  have
equal length, which is 2πr ÷ 2 = πr.

Instead  of  reflecting  the  figure  in  the  diameter  AB,  we  can  also
imagine  rotating  the  whole  figure  around  the  centre  O  through  an
angle of 180°, i.e., through a half-turn. The effect is the same, and we
get the same formula for the length of the semicircular arc.

C

B

O

D

A

Fig. 6.9: Four quarter circles
make a full circle

Note the following:

Imagine  rotating

What will be the length of a quarter
circle with the same radius (Fig. 6.9)?
the  entire
figure  through  90°,  clockwise  or
anticlockwise.  Each  quarter  circle
moves  and  covers  another  quarter
circle. So each quarter circle has the
same arc length, and this is equal to
2πr ÷ 4 = πr
2

.

•  The  formula  for  the  length  of  a  semicircle  may  also  be  written

as 2πr ×  180o
360o  .

Chapter 6.indd   125
Chapter 6.indd   125

4/15/2026   3:02:35 PM
4/15/2026   3:02:35 PM

Measuring Space: Perimeter and Area126

•  The formula for the length of a quarter circle may also be written

as 2πr × 90o
360o  .

From these, we can guess the formula for the length of an arc of a
circle in terms of the angle it makes (i.e., the angle it ‘subtends’) at the
centre of the circle.

B

If the arc is AB, and it subtends an
angle  θ°  at  the  centre  O  of  the  circle,

r ×
the length of the arc is 2πr ×

2
π

°
θ
360

..

°

θ°

O

A

Fig. 6.10: Length of an arc
of a circle

A Closer Look at a 400 m Athletics Track

Fig. 6.11: Schematic diagram of a 400 m athletics track

Chapter 6.indd   126
Chapter 6.indd   126

4/15/2026   3:02:38 PM
4/15/2026   3:02:38 PM

Ganita Manjari | Grade 9 | Part I127

Fig.  6.11  depicts  a  400  m  athletics  track.  You  can  see  two  straight
sections  of  length  84.39  m  each,  and  two  curved  portions,  which  are
semicircles  with  a  common  centre  (points  A  and  B);  the  innermost
semicircle  on  each  side  has  radius  36.5  m.  The  width  of  each  lane  is
1.22 m.

Let  an athlete make one complete circuit of the track. What is the

total distance she runs?

•  Let us assume that she runs at a distance of 0.3 m from the inner

border.

•  She runs two straight sections of length 84.39 m each, a total of

168.78 m.

•  She also runs two semicircles of radius (36.5 + 0.3) m, i.e., 36.8 m.

•  The two semicircles together make up a complete circle.

•

Its circumference is 2 × π × 36.8 = 2 × 3.1416 × 36.8 = 231.22 m.

•  The total distance run by the athlete is therefore 168.78 + 231.22

= 400 m.

Now consider two runners, one in the innermost lane, the other in
the second lane. On the straight stretch the two runners run the same
distance. But on the curved portions the runner in the second lane runs
a  greater  distance,  because  her  semicircle  has  a  larger  radius.  It  is  to
compensate for this that staggers are needed.

Think and Reflect

What is the difference in radius between the first and second lanes? Use
the Fig. 6.11 to find the stagger needed by the runner in the second lane.
Will an equal stagger be needed between the third and second lanes?

6.5 Problems, Puzzles, and Paradoxes on Perimeter

We close this section by looking at a sprinkling of interesting problems
around the theme of perimeter.

Example 1: Two circles of equal radius are located such that each

circle passes through the centre of the other circle (Fig. 6.12).

Given  that  the  radius  of  each  circle  is  r  units,  find  the  perimeter
of the shape formed by the two circles in terms of r units. (Ignore the
dotted portions that lie within the circles.)

Chapter 6.indd   127
Chapter 6.indd   127

4/15/2026   3:02:38 PM
4/15/2026   3:02:38 PM

Measuring Space: Perimeter and Area128

C

A

B

D

Fig. 6.12

Here,  we  have  two  congruent
circles  centered  at  A  and  B.  Each
one  passes  through  the  centre  of
the other one. The circles intersect
at C and D. We need to find the total
length  of  the  two  red  arcs  shown
here, in terms of the radius r unit.
the

triangle  with
vertices  A,  B,  C.  Since  AB  =  r,
AC  =  r,  BC  =  r,  the  triangle  is
equilateral,  hence  ∠CAB  =  60°  =
∠CBA.

Consider

Similarly ∠BAD = 60° = ∠ABD. It follows that ∠CAD = 120° = ∠CBD.

Hence,  each  dotted  arc  is

  of  the  circumference  of  the  circle  on

which it lies. Hence, the total length of the two red arcs is 2

2
× ×
3

2
=π
r

π

r .

8
3

1
3

a

c

P

b

Fig. 6.13

Q

d

Example  2:  In  Fig.  6.13,  we  see
points  P  and  Q  and  two  paths
connecting  them.  The  first  path  is
made  up  of  the  semicircle  a.  The
other  path  is  made  up  of  three
semicircles (b, c and d). Which path
is  longer?  Choose  one:  (i)  Path  a  is
longer.  (ii)  Path  b  +  c  +  d  is  longer.
(iii)  The  two  paths  have  equal
length.  (Try  to  answer  this  before
reading on.)

Let  us  solve  the  problem  using  algebra.  Let  the  radii  of  the
semicircles  a, b, c, d be denoted by a', b', c' and d'. Then the length of

semicircle a is

1
2

 (2π) a' = πa'. Similarly, the lengths of the semicircles

b,  c,  and  d  are  πb',  πc'  and  πd'.  So,  the  length  of  the  second  path  is
π(b' + c' + d'), and that of the first path is πa'.

Which  is  bigger,  b'  +  c'  +  d'  or  a' ?  Do  you  see  that  neither  one  is
bigger? They are equal! Because, the length of PQ is 2a' and it is also
equal to 2b' + 2c' + 2d'. It follows that a' = b' + c' + d'. Hence, the two
paths have equal length!

Chapter 6.indd   128
Chapter 6.indd   128

4/15/2026   3:02:39 PM
4/15/2026   3:02:39 PM

Ganita Manjari | Grade 9 | Part IExErcisE sEt 6.1

129

Unless stated otherwise, use the approximation

22
7

 for π.

  1.  The perimeter of a circle is 44 cm. What is its radius?
  2.  Calculate,  correct  to  3  significant  figures,  the  circumference  of  a
circle with: (i) radius 7 cm (ii) radius 10 cm (iii) radius 12 cm.
  3.  Calculate the length of the arc of a circle if: (i) the radius is 3.5 cm
and the angle at the centre is 60°, and (ii) the radius is 6.3 m and
the angle at the centre is 120°.

  4.  Find the perimeter of a sector (i.e., the curved portion as well as the
two straight portions) of a circle of radius 14 cm and sector angle 75°.
  5.  Find  the  perimeters  of  the  following  shapes  (taking  the  arcs  to
be  quarter  or  half  or  three-quarters  of  a  circle,  as  appropriate)
(Fig. 6.14i to 6.14ix):

(i)

(iv)

60 m

80 m

12 cm

(ii)

(v)

8 cm

12 cm

14 cm

(iii)

(vi)

(vii)

(viii)

(ix)

10 cm

28 cm

6 cm

8 cm

4 cm 4 cm 4 cm

10 cm

10 cm

Fig. 6.14

Chapter 6.indd   129
Chapter 6.indd   129

4/15/2026   3:02:40 PM
4/15/2026   3:02:40 PM

Measuring Space: Perimeter and Area130

  6.  If  the  diameter  of  a  car  tyre  is  56  cm,  then:  (i)  How  far  does
the  car  need  to  travel  for  the  tyre  to  complete  one  revolution?
(ii) How many revolutions does the tyre make if the car travels
10 km?

  7.  Find the total perimeter of all the petals in each of the given flowers.

(i)

(ii)

42 cm

14 cm

Fig. 6.15A: The centres of the arcs are the
midpoints of the sides of the square

Fig. 6.15B: The centres of the arcs
are the vertices of the hexagon

  8.  The ratio of the perimeters of two circles is 5:4. What is the ratio of

their radii?

6.6 Area of a Rectangle

From perimeter, we move to area, i.e., to the ‘amount of space’ occupied
by a two-dimensional region in a plane.

Measurement  is  always  relative  to  something  we  call  a  unit.  For
area, the unit is a 1 × 1 square; its area is taken to be 1 unit2 (also written
as 1 sq. unit). You know from Grade 8 that the area of a rectangle with
sides a units and b units is ab sq. units (Fig. 6.16).

a units

b units

1 unit

1 unit

1
unit

b

a
units

a
units

Area = 1 sq. units

Area = b sq. units

Area = a2 sq. units

Area = ab sq. units

Fig. 6.16: Area of square and rectangle

6.7 Area of a Parallelogram

You  also  know  from  Grade  8  the  formula  for  the  area  of  a
parallelogram.

Chapter 6.indd   130
Chapter 6.indd   130

4/15/2026   3:02:40 PM
4/15/2026   3:02:40 PM

Ganita Manjari | Grade 9 | Part I131

A

D

E

A'

F

D'

h

Height, h

B

C

B'

Base, b

C'

Fig. 6.17: Area of a parallelogram. Here, A'B'C'D' is a copy of ABCD.

Fig.  6.17  shows  how  to  transform  a  parallelogram  ABCD  into  a
rectangle  EB'C'F  (at  right;  here,  parallelogram  A'B'C'D'  is  a  copy  of
ABCD) with the same base b and same height h. Though the two shapes
are different, their areas are the same. So, the area of the parallelogram
is equal to base × height = bh.

Think and Reflect

What  happens  if  the  parallelogram
is ‘thin’ (Fig. 6.18) and the foot of the
perpendicular from C to AD does not
lie on side AD? The construction then
does not seem to work. How do we fix
this ‘gap’?

B

C

Fig. 6.18

A

D

Here is a hint on how the problem of the ‘thin parallelogram’ can be

solved.

A'

A

D'

D

B

C

Fig. 6.19: The thin parallelogram

Think and Reflect

Select  a  point  D'  on  DA,  close  to
D, and a point A' on DA extended,
with  A'A  =  D'D  (Fig.  6.19).  Then
A'BCD'  is  a  parallelogram,  and
since ΔCDD' ≅ ΔBAA', its area is the
same as that of ABCD. Now repeat
this step as many times as needed.

The  area  of  a  rectangle  can  be  found  when  we  know  the  lengths  of  its
sides. Is the same true for a parallelogram? That is, can we find the area of
a parallelogram when we know the lengths of its sides? Why or why not?

Chapter 6.indd   131
Chapter 6.indd   131

4/15/2026   3:02:40 PM
4/15/2026   3:02:40 PM

Measuring Space: Perimeter and Area132

(Hint:  What  happens  to  the  area  of  a  parallelogram  if  we  decrease
or  increase  the  angle  between  the  adjacent  sides  while  keeping
the lengths fixed?)

6.8 Area of a Triangle

Next,  we  work  out  a  formula  for  the  area  of  a  triangle.  (You  have
seen the formula in Grade 8, but we will go over the idea again, briefly.)
One  way  to  proceed  is  to  first  consider  the  case  of  a  right-angled
triangle and then other triangles. In both cases, we enclose the triangle
in  a  rectangle;  then  we  use  the  formula  for  area  of  a  rectangle.  (See
Fig. 6.20A. Notice that FG = FJ + JG and so b = b1 + b2.) We find as a result
that the area of a triangle with base b units and height h units is half
the area of the rectangle with base b units and height h units. That is,

the area is equal to

1
2

 bh sq. units.

You  may  wonder,  like  earlier,  is  there  a  gap  in  our  argument?
What  would  we  do  if  angle  EFG  is  obtuse  and  the  triangle  were
shaped like triangle EFG in Fig. 6.20B? Please work out the answer
to this question.

A

D

H

E

I

E

Height, h

Base, b

Height, h

Base, b1

Base, b2

B

C

F

J

Fig. 6.20A: Area of a triangle

G

F

G

Fig. 6.20B

A nicer way of working out the formula for the area of a triangle is
by seeing that two congruent copies of a triangle can be fitted together
to make a parallelogram.

C'

A

B'

A

D

A'

C

B

C

Fig. 6.21B

B

Fig. 6.21A

In  Fig.  6.21A,  triangles
ABC  and  A'B'C'  are
congruent.
fit
together  as  in  Fig.  6.21B
to make a parallelogram.

They

Chapter 6.indd   132
Chapter 6.indd   132

4/15/2026   3:02:40 PM
4/15/2026   3:02:40 PM

Ganita Manjari | Grade 9 | Part IDo  you  see  why  the  two  triangles  fit  together  to  make  a
parallelogram? (If you study the angles in the figure (e.g., ∠B'C'A' and
∠BCA), you will see why this is so. Keep in mind the criterion by which
we check whether two lines are parallel.)

133

We already know, area of a parallelogram: base × height = bh.
1
2

So, the formula for the area a triangle is

 (base × height) =

1
2

 bh.

A property of the median of a triangle. From the above formula
we reach a simple but beautiful conclusion about any of the medians of
a triangle.

A

Height h

B

D
Base, BC = 2a units

C

Fig. 6.22

A median is the line segment joining
a  vertex  of  the  triangle  to  the
midpoint  of  the  opposite  side.  In
Fig. 6.22, AD is a median of ΔABC.

Consider ΔABD and ΔACD. Their
bases  are  equal  (BD  =  DC),  and
they have equal height h. Using the
formula  for  the  area  of  a  triangle,
they  have  equal
we  see

that

area

ah
2

 sq. units!

We state this as a theorem.

Theorem: A median of a triangle divides it into two triangles with equal
area.

Does this come as a surprise? It should! After all, ΔABD and ΔACD
are  (in  general)  differently  shaped  (i.e.,  not  congruent  to  each  other).
But we have just proved that they have the same area!

Think and Reflect

Since  ΔABD  and  ΔACD  have  equal  area,  you  may  wonder — Can  we
 divide ΔABD using straight cuts into two or more pieces that we can then
rearrange to exactly cover ΔACD? What do you think? Is it possible?

We shall spoil the surprise by revealing that it is possible. But we
will not tell you the least number of pieces required. Try to find the
answer!

Chapter 6.indd   133
Chapter 6.indd   133

4/15/2026   3:02:40 PM
4/15/2026   3:02:40 PM

Measuring Space: Perimeter and Area134

Think and Reflect

Suppose  we  are  given  two  polygons  P  and  Q  with  equal  area.  Will  it
always be possible to divide one of them using straight cuts into two or
more  pieces  and  then  rearrange  the  pieces  to  exactly  cover  the  other
polygon? Try this out for familiar shapes, e.g.,

1. A square and non-square rectangle with equal area,

2. Two triangles with different shapes but equal area,

3.  A triangle and a square with equal area. Formulate a conjecture of

your own about this.

Think of various rectangles with perimeter 40 units (the sides do not have
to be integers).

1. How many such rectangles are there?

2.  Among  them,  is  there  one  whose  area  is  the  largest?  What  are  its

dimensions?

3.  Among  all  these  rectangles,  is  there  one  whose  area  is  the  smallest?
What are its dimensions? Do either of these answers come as a surprise
to you?

6.8.1 Heron’s formula

You  already  know  a  formula  for  the  area  of  a  triangle  (half  base
times  height).  Are  there  other  formulas  for  the  area  of  a  triangle?
There are several. For now we mention Heron’s formula, discovered
by  the  Greek  mathematics  and  inventor,  Heron.  He  taught  at  the
Museum in Alexandria, a city in ancient Egypt located on the banks
of the Nile.

The formula states that if ΔABC has side lengths BC = a, CA = b, and
AB  =  c,  then  its  area  can  be  found  as  follows.  First,  we  compute  the
semi-perimeter,  s  which  is  half  the  perimeter:  s
).  Then  the
area (∆ABC) is given by

a b c
+ +

1
2

=

(

s s a s b s c
(
−

)(

)(

−

−

).

I am sure you will find the formula extremely surprising and strange

looking! Let us test it against some known cases.

Example 3: An equilateral triangle with side a units.

Chapter 6.indd   134
Chapter 6.indd   134

4/15/2026   3:02:46 PM
4/15/2026   3:02:46 PM

Ganita Manjari | Grade 9 | Part Ilength  a,  so

the  semi-perimeter

is

135

three  sides  have

All
1
2

(

3
2

s

=

a a a
+ +

)

=

a

 units. Heron’s formula now yields,

area of triangle

=

3
2

a

1
2





a

1
2









a

1
2









a


 =


3
4

2

a

A

a

a

h

 sq. units

Let  us  check  this  against  the
‘half
base  times  height’  formula.  Let  h  units
be the height of the triangle. Then, by the
Baudhāyana–Pythagoras theorem,

2

a

2

h

−

=

2

a
4

,

2
h
∴ =

2

3

a
4

,

h
∴ =

3
2

a

So the area is

1
2

×

3
2

× =

a a

.
a  sq. units.

2

3
4

B

a
2

D

a
2

C

Same formula!

Fig. 6.23

Note:  Notice  the  symbol  ‘∴’.  This  symbol  is  used  regularly  by
mathematicians; it means and is read as ‘therefore’.

Example 4: An isosceles triangle with equal sides a units and base 2b units.
) = +  units. Heron’s formula

The semi-perimeter is s =

a a

a b

+ +

b

2

(

1
2

a b a b a a b a a b
)(

)(

)(

+ −

+ −

+ −

+

2

b

)

=

b a

2

2

b

−

now yields,

area of the triangle =
sq. units.

(

A

a

a

h

B

b

D

b

C

Fig. 6.24

Let  us  check  this  against  the  ‘half  base
times  height’  formula.  Let  h  units  be
the  height  of  the  triangle.  Then,  by
the Baudhāyana–Pythagoras theorem,

2

a

2

(cid:31)

h

(cid:30)

2

,

b

2
(cid:29) (cid:30)
h

a

2

(cid:31)

2
,
b h

(cid:30)

2

a

(cid:31)

2

.

b

So the area is

1
2
sq. units, the same as earlier.

a

b

2

×

−

×

2

2

b b a

=

2

2
b

−

Chapter 6.indd   135
Chapter 6.indd   135

4/15/2026   3:03:01 PM
4/15/2026   3:03:01 PM

Measuring Space: Perimeter and Area

136

Example 5: A triangle with sides 3 units, 4 units and 5 units.

The semi-perimeter is s =

1
2

)
3 4 5
(
+ +

=

6

 units. Heron’s formula now yields,

area of triangle  =

A

)
6 6 3
(

×

−

×

(
6 4
−

)

×

)
6 5
(
−

=

6 3 2 6
× × =

 sq. units.

Let us check this against the ‘half base times height’
formula. See Fig. 6.25; note that 32 + 42 = 52. Therefore,
by  the  converse  of  the  Baudhāyana–Pythagoras
hypotenuse theorem, ΔABC is right-angled at B. So,

base = 3 units, height = 4 units,

so the area is

1
2

(

base height
×

)

=

1
2

3 4
(
×

)

6

=  sq. units,

the same as earlier.

4

5

B

3

C

Fig. 6.25

We get the correct result in each case.
You  may  wonder  how  Heron’s  formula  is  proved.  There  are
many  proofs  known;  one  of  them  uses  the  Baudhāyana–Pythagoras
theorem  and  repeated  use  of  the  ‘difference-of-two-squares’  formula
a2 – b2 = (a – b)(a + b). We will study some of these proofs in Grade 10.

There are two other such formulas for the area of a triangle. Both

have a connection with circles. See Fig. 6.26.

Given  any  triangle  ABC,  there  is  exactly  one  circle  that  passes

through its three vertices. This is called the circumcircle of ∆ABC.

There  is  also  exactly  one  circle  that  fits  tightly  in  the  triangle,

touching its three sides. This is called the incircle of ∆ABC.

A

Circumcircle
Radius R

c

b

Incircle
Radius r

B

a

C

Fig. 6.26

Let the sides of  ΔABC be a, b, and c. Let
the radius of the circumcircle be R. Let
the radius of the incircle be r. Then we
have  the  following  two  formulas  for
the area:

ABC

∆

=

abc
R4

Area of

ABC

∆

=

r a b c
(
+ +
2

)

Area of

Chapter 6.indd   136
Chapter 6.indd   136

4/15/2026   3:03:10 PM
4/15/2026   3:03:10 PM

Ganita Manjari | Grade 9 | Part I137

Both  formulas  have  a  beautiful  symmetry  about  them!  The  proof
of the second formula requires a result that you will study in Grade 10.

Brahmagupta’s Formula for the Area of a Cyclic 4-gon

We have seen how to find the area of a triangle given the lengths of its
three sides. The natural question then is: how can we find the area of a
4-gon given the lengths of its four sides?

Earlier we asked, can we find the area of a parallelogram if we know
only the lengths of its sides? The answer is: No. In the same way we ask:
can we find the area of a 4-gon if we only know the lengths of its sides?
The figures below reveal the answer to this question.

The problem (Fig. 6.27) is about a 4-gon whose sides are known to be
3, 3, 3, 3 (it is a ‘rhombus’). As you can see, the areas of the three figures
are different. (We drew the figures using GeoGebra and found the areas
using the ‘Area’ tool. Please try this exercise yourself, or by using four
rods joined together at their ends.)

A

B

D

A

D

Area = 9

Area = 8.01

A

D

Area = 5.41

C

B

C

B

C

Fig. 6.27: The area of a 4-gon cannot be found only
 from the lengths of its sides

So  we  cannot  find  the  area  of  a  4-gon  only  from  the  lengths  of  its
four sides; we need more information. This could be one angle of the
4-gon, or the length of one diagonal, or the angle at which the diagonals
cut each other, etc.

Or it could be a key geometric property of the figure.
One  such  property  is  that  the  4-gon  is  a  cyclic  4-gon.  In  628  CE,
Brahmagupta  (598– 668  CE)  discovered  a  wonderful  formula  for  the
area of a cyclic 4-gon.

Chapter 6.indd   137
Chapter 6.indd   137

4/15/2026   3:03:10 PM
4/15/2026   3:03:10 PM

Measuring Space: Perimeter and Area138

D

A

d

a

c

The  formula  states  that  if  the  sides  of  the
cyclic 4-gon have lengths  a, b, c, d, and the
semi-perimeter s is s

a b c d
+ + +

, then:

=

(

)

1
2

Area(cid:27)of(cid:27)4-gon =

)
−(
)
−(
s a s b s c s d .

−(

−(

)

)

B

b

C

It is an amazing and beautiful formula!

Fig. 6.28: A cyclic 4-gon

Does it not remind us of Heron’s formula
for the area of a triangle?

We can verify that the formula works out correctly in various special

cases.

Example 6: Verify Brahmagupta’s formula for the case of a rectangle.
All  rectangles  are  cyclic,  so  Brahmagupta’s  formula  should  apply.

Let the sides of the rectangle be a, b. Then  s
formula yields:

=

1
2

2

a

2

b

+

(

) = +
a b

, so the

Area =

(

(
)
a b a a b b a b a a b b

+ −

+ −

+ −

+ −

)

(

)

(

) =

ab ab ab,

=

⋅

which is correct. Please check out the formula against other special cases.
Example 7: Verify Brahmagupta’s formula for the case of an isosceles

trapezium.

A

2a

B

c

D

c

h

2b

C

Fig. 6.29: Isosceles trapezium

All  isosceles  trapezia  are  cyclic,
hence  the  formula  should  apply.
The  perimeter  is  2a  +  2b  +  2c,  so
s = a + b + c. Hence, the area as given
by the formula should be
−(
)
)
−(
)
b s c s c
a s

−(
s

−(

2

2

)

.

Since s – 2a = c + b – a, s – 2b = c + a
– 2b, s – c = a + b the above formula
simplifies to

+(
a b

)

(

(
)
c b a c a b

+ −

+ −

) =

+(
a b

)

2

c

−

−(
b a

2

)

.

Chapter 6.indd   138
Chapter 6.indd   138

4/15/2026   3:03:26 PM
4/15/2026   3:03:26 PM

Ganita Manjari | Grade 9 | Part I139

If  we  imagine  a  perpendicular  dropped  from  B  to  the  base  CD,  its
) .
length  (recall  the  Baudhāyana–Pythagoras  theorem)  is
Hence, the area is (a + b)h. We get exactly the same formula if we recall
that  the  area  of  an  isosceles  trapezium  is  half  the  sum  of  the  parallel
sides times the distance between the parallel sides.

−(
b a

−

c

2

2

Special Cases and Generalisation in Mathematics

The  notion  of  a  ‘special  case’  occurs  often  in  higher  mathematics.
A special case results from a general result whenever we apply some extra
condition. We list a few such examples.
The general result is also called a generalisation of the special case. The
process of generalisation is an extremely important part of mathematics.
Example: A square is a special case of a rectangle.

So, the formula for the area of a square (A = a2) is a special case of the

formula for the area of a rectangle (A = ab) obtained by putting b = a.

Similarly, the formula for the perimeter of a square is a special case of

the formula for the perimeter of a rectangle.
Example:  An  isosceles  right-angled  triangle  is  a  special  case  of  a
right-angled triangle.

So, from any theorem about all right-angled triangles, we can extract a

special case that applies to isosceles, right-angled triangles.
Take a right-angled triangle ABC with ∠C = 90°; then we have a2 + b2 = c2
(this is the Baudhāyana–Pythagoras theorem). Let us take a special case
of this with a = b (this corresponds to the triangle being isosceles). We get
a2  +  b2  =  c2,  i.e.,  c2  =  2a2  and  so  c a=
(a2  +  b2  =  c2)  has  reduced  to  this  special  case  ( c a=

2.  The  general  theorem

2)  for  isosceles

right-angled triangles (with a = b).

Here is another example. Compare the following identities from algebra:
2

2

2

ab a b c

+ +

a

=

b

+

2 2
+

c

+

ab

+

2

bc

+

2

ca

.

(

a b
+

2
)

a

=

2 2
b
+

+

2
)

(

a b

+

2
)

2

a

=

+

2 2
b
+

ab a b c

+ +

(
,(cid:29)(cid:29)

2
)

2

2

b

+

+

a

=

ab

2

bc

+

+

2

ca

.

(
,(cid:29)(cid:29)
2 2
+

c

Can you see that the first identity is a special case of the second one (put
c = 0 in the second identity), and the second identity is a generalisation of
the first one?

You  will  meet  many  examples  of  special  cases  and  generalisation  in

later years.

Chapter 6.indd   139
Chapter 6.indd   139

4/15/2026   3:03:34 PM
4/15/2026   3:03:34 PM

Measuring Space: Perimeter and Area140

Brahmagupta’s Formula Generalises Heron’s Formula

The  similarity
formula  and
in  appearance  between  Heron’s
Brahmagupta’s  formula  is  not  an  accident.  How?  Brahmagupta’s
formula generalises Heron’s formula. That is, we can think of Heron’s
formula as a special case of Brahmagupta’s formula.

A triangle with sides a, b, c can be regarded as a ‘special case’ of
a 4-gon ABCD whose fourth side d has zero length (d = 0). So we have
AB  = a,  BC  =  b,  CD  =  c,  which  means  in  effect  that  vertices  A  and  D
coincide.

(If the vertices represent planets, then this would be a case of two
planets colliding with each other and forming a single large planet! This
actually happened in the early history of the solar system.)

Since any triangle is cyclic (given any three points not in a straight
line,  we  can  draw  a  circle  through  them),  this  4-gon  is  cyclic  too.  So,
Brahmagupta’s formula must apply to this 4-gon.

Let  us  see  what  emerges  from  this.  We  first  compute  the

semi-perimeter of the 4-gon (keep in mind that d = 0):

s

=

1
2

(

a b c

+ + +

0

) =

1
2

(

a b c
+ +

.

)

We see that s is the same as the semi-perimeter of the given triangle.

Now we apply Brahmagupta’s formula:

Area(cid:27)of(cid:27)triangle =

=

−(
)
−(
s a s b s c s d

−(

−(

)

)

)

−(
−(
−(
s s a s b s c

)

)

)

(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)

d
since
(cid:31)
 since  d = 0.

0

=

.

This is Heron’s formula!

Brahmagupta’s formula may thus be viewed as a generalisation of

Heron’s formula.

6.9 Squaring a Rectangle

In  ancient  times,  to  ‘square  a  given  shape’  meant  to  ‘construct  a
square  equal  in  area  to  that  shape’.  The  shape  could  be  a  rectangle
or  a  triangle  or  a  circle.  Here,  we  show  how  the  ancient  Indian
mathematician  Baudhāyana  squared  a  rectangle.  The  construction,
from his Śhulbasūtra (800 BCE), shows how to square a rectangle with
sides a units and b units where a > b. This means that we must construct

Chapter 6.indd   140
Chapter 6.indd   140

4/15/2026   3:03:41 PM
4/15/2026   3:03:41 PM

Ganita Manjari | Grade 9 | Part I
a  square  with  area ab  sq.  units.  Here  is  a  slightly  simplified  form  of
Baudhāyana’s construction (Fig. 6.30).

141

H

B

b

S

A

P G

K

Q

E

a
Fig. 6.30: Rectangle ABCD with
AD = a, AB = b

F

•  Given: rectangle ABCD with
AD = a, AB = b where a > b.

•  Locate E on AD so that AE = AB.

•  Locate the midpoint F of ED.

C

D

•  Draw  square  AFGH  with  side  AF

and vertex H on AB produced.

•  Draw  arc  AG  with  centre  H.  Let

arc AG cut side BC at K.

•  Draw a line through K parallel to

AH. Let it cut GH at P.

•  Draw  square  HPQS  with  HP
as side. Then square HPQS has the
same area as rectangle ABCD.

Try  to  work  out  why  this  method  works.  You  will  find  that  it  is  a

geometrical translation of the formula

*Why does this method work?

a b

+



2

2

 −


a b

−



2

2

 =


ab

.

Refer  to  Fig.  6.30.  From  AE  =  b  we  get  AF
Hence, HG

 as HK is a radius of the circle.

HK

=

=

a b
+
2

=

AE AD
+
2

=

a b
+
2

.

Next,  BH AH AB AF AB
−

=

=

−

=

a b
+
2

b
− =

a b
−
2 .

Now consider the right-angled triangle HKP. Using the Baudhāyana–

2

Pythagoras theorem we get
a b
+

2

2

HP HK
=

BH

a

a

2

−

=

2

2

2

2

2

−

+

ab b
+
4

−

2


 −

2
ab b
+
4

=

2

a b
−

 =

2


aab ab
2+
2

=

.
ab

Therefore square HPQS has the same area as rectangle ABCD.

Chapter 6.indd   141
Chapter 6.indd   141

4/15/2026   3:03:55 PM
4/15/2026   3:03:55 PM

Measuring Space: Perimeter and Area142

Think and Reflect

What procedure would you use to square a given triangle? Here, the task
is  to  construct  a  square  whose  area  is  equal  to  the  area  of  some  given
triangle. Think carefully. How would you proceed?

ExErcisE sEt 6.2

  1.  Find the area of triangle ADE in Fig. 6.31.

A

D

E

B

C

8 cm

10 cm

Fig. 6.31

  2.  The  parallel  sides  of  a  trapezium  are  40  cm  and  20  cm.  If  its
non-parallel sides are both equal, each being 26 cm, find the area
of the trapezium.

  3.  Find the area of a triangle, given that its sides are 8 cm and 11 cm

long, and its perimeter is 32 cm.

  4.  The sides of a triangular plot are in the ratio 3: 5: 7; its perimeter is

300 m. Find its area.

  5.  One diagonal of a rhombus is twice as long as the other diagonal. If the

rhombus has area 128 cm2, find the length of the shorter diagonal.

  6.  ABCD is a parallelogram. P and Q are any two points on side AB.
What can you say about the ratio area (ΔPCD): area (ΔQCD)?

  7.  O is any point on the diagonal PR of a parallelogram PQRS. Prove

that the areas of triangles PSO and PQO are equal.

  8.  If  the  mid-points  of  the  sides  of  a  4-gon  (also  known  as  a
quadrilateral,  but  we  prefer  to  call  it  a  ‘4-gon’)  are  joined  in
order,  prove  that  the  area  of  the  parallelogram  thus  formed  will
be half of the area of the given 4-gon. (You may wonder whether

Chapter 6.indd   142
Chapter 6.indd   142

4/15/2026   3:03:55 PM
4/15/2026   3:03:55 PM

Ganita Manjari | Grade 9 | Part Ithe 4-gon thus formed is always a parallelogram, and if so, why?
These  questions  will  be  tackled  and  answered  in  the  chapter  on
quadrilaterals.)

  9.  In ∆ABC, the midpoint of BC is D (Fig. 6.32). Median AD is drawn. P is

any point on AD. Show that area (∆ABP) = area (∆ACP).

143

A

P

  B

D

C

A

B

P

D

C

Fig. 6.32

Fig. 6.33

 10.  Given a square ABCD, let P be a point within it. Join PA, PB, PC, PD
(Fig. 6.33). What is the ratio of the areas of the red region (∆PAB
and ∆PCD) and the green region (∆PBC and ∆PDA)?

 11.  In ∆ABC, D is the midpoint of AB. P is any point on BC, and Q is a
point on AB such that CQ || PD. PQ is joined (Fig. 6.34). Prove that
Area (∆BPQ) =

 Area (∆ABC).

1
2

A

Q

D

B

P

C

Fig. 6.34

6.10 Area of a Circle

A  circle  is  an  extremely  basic  shape;  it  is  easy  to  draw  if  we  have  a
rope  and  a  peg  to  which  the  rope  can  be  tied.  Human  beings  have
used  the  circular  shape  in  their  settlements,  buildings  and  tools  for
thousands of years.

Chapter 6.indd   143
Chapter 6.indd   143

4/15/2026   3:03:55 PM
4/15/2026   3:03:55 PM

Measuring Space: Perimeter and Area

144

Think and Reflect

Why were human beings so fond of using circular shapes? Was this only
for practical reasons, or could there have been other reasons too? What
kinds of uses have human beings found for the circular shape?

Early  on,  human  beings  faced  the  challenge  of  finding  the  area  A
enclosed by a circle. They may have needed, for example, to work out
how much grain can be kept in a cylindrical tower (which has a circular
cross section), or how much area is occupied by a circular garden or a
circular building. They needed such data for planning out their cities,
for tax purposes, etc.

Early  societies  understood  very  well  that  the  area  A  must  be
proportional to the square of the circumference C. Let’s see why this is so.
•  Suppose we are given a square. Let its side be a. It has perimeter
P = 4a and area A = a2. So the  ratio P2 : A = (4a2) : a2 = 16a2 : a2 =
16 : 1. So the ratio P2 : A is 16 : 1 for all squares; the ratio does not
depend on the size of the square — it is the same for all squares.
•  Consider an equilateral triangle with side a. Its perimeter is P = 3a

a

2

3
. So P2 : A = (

a

2
) :

3
4

2

a

=

2

9

a

:

3
4

2

a

36

:

=

3

.

and its area is A

3
4
So the ratio P2 : A is  36

=

3:

 for all equilateral triangles; the ratio does
not depend on the size of the equilateral triangle — it is the same for all
equilateral triangles.

•  Similarly,  for  various  shapes,  as  we  change  the  scale,  the  ratio
P2 : A stays fixed. The value of the ratio depends only on the shape,
not on its scale.

Such  reasoning  suggests  that  for  a  circle  too,  if  C  =  circumference
and A = area, the ratio C2 : A must be some fixed constant. But what is
this constant?

Well  before  1500  BCE,  the  Babylonians  had  found  through  actual
measurement that the constant is close to 12; that is, C2 : A ≈ 12 : 1. So,

their formula for the area of a circle was A ≈

2

C
12 .

Around 1500 BCE, the ancient Egyptians came up with another such
formula  which  resembles  the  one  described  above  but  is  much  more

accurate:  A

≈

d
8
9









2

 where d is the diameter of the circle. Since d = 2r,

Chapter 6.indd   144
Chapter 6.indd   144

4/15/2026   3:04:06 PM
4/15/2026   3:04:06 PM

Ganita Manjari | Grade 9 | Part Ithis may also be written as  A




in  the  Baudhāyana
Śhulbasūtra (800 BCE) via a geometric method for constructing a square
with (approximately) the same area as a circle.

Amazingly,  the  same  formula  appears

4 2 ,  i.e.,  A
r













≈

≈

r

.

2

256
81

64
81

145

The Familiar Formula in Use Today

The  ancient  Greeks  also  knew  that

A

r2

  is  some  constant — but  did  not

know what that constant was. Two different civilisations approximated

it to be

256
81

.

Finally,  in  c.  250  BCE,  Archimedes  showed  that  the  constant
is  exactly  π  (i.e.,  the  same  constant  that  occurs  in  the  formula  for
perimeter  of  a  circle!);  so,  A  =  πr2.  He  expressed  the  formula  this
way: “The area of a circle is equal to the area of a right angle triangle
with  sides  equal  to  the  radius  and  the  circumference  of  the  circle”.
That is,

Area(cid:27)of(cid:27)circle

1
= ×
2

circumference radius

×

1
= ×
2

2
π

× =

r r

π

2

r .

The  proof  given  by  Archimedes  is  very  clever.  It  is  based  on  a
property shared by all regular polygons: The area enclosed by a regular
polygon is equal to half the perimeter × the radius of the circle that fits
tightly  within  the  polygon  (Fig.  6.36).  (The  proof  of  this  formula  is  an
extension of the proof of the formula of the area of a triangle in terms
of the radius of its incircle.)

O

r

O

r

O

r

Fig. 6.36: Area of a regular polygon =

1
2

 × perimeter of the polygon × radius

Chapter 6.indd   145
Chapter 6.indd   145

4/15/2026   3:04:15 PM
4/15/2026   3:04:15 PM

Measuring Space: Perimeter and Area146

Archimedes  did  a  ‘thought  experiment’;  he  asked  himself  what
happens if the number of sides of the regular polygon gets larger and
larger. Working out the details, he arrived at the result A = πr2.

is

Here  perhaps

the  most  visual  and  easy-to-understand
explanation  for  why  the  area  of  a  circle  of  radius  r  has  area  πr2.
This  beautiful  visual  explanation  for  the  area  of  the  circle  was  first
discovered by Nīlakaṇṭha Somayājī (c. 1500) in his commentary on the
Āryabhaṭīya:

(A)

(B)

Fig. 6.37: The slices can be rearranged to form a
parallelogram-like structure

As  the  slices  become  smaller  and  smaller,  the  arcs  in  Fig.  6.37B
become more and more closer to a line. This makes the figure more and
more closer to a parallelogram with

base = half the circumference (why?) = πr,

height = radius r.

This gives a way to argue that the area of the circle is equal to the

area of a parallelogram!

Area of the circle = Area of the parallelogram = base × height = πr2.

6.10.1 Area of Sector of a Circle

A  sector  of  a  circle  is  the  region  bounded
by  an  arc  and  the  two  radii  containing  the
endpoints of the arc.

The  area  within  a  sector  of  a  circle  may
be  found  the  same  way  that  we  found  the
length of a circular arc. Examine Fig. 6.39 and
Fig. 6.40.

O

θ°

B

A

Fig. 6.38: Sector of a circle

Chapter 6.indd   146
Chapter 6.indd   146

4/15/2026   3:04:16 PM
4/15/2026   3:04:16 PM

Ganita Manjari | Grade 9 | Part I
147

A

r

O

B

Fig. 6.39: Area of a
semi-circular disc

By  symmetry,  we  see  that  the  area  of  a
180
360

 of the area

semicircular disc is

1
2

th

 =





 πr2.

of the circle, i.e.,

1
2

We could use the reflection symmetry of

the circle to understand this result.

B

O

O

C

By  symmetry,  we  see  that  the  area  of  a

quarter circular disc is

A

of the circle, i.e.,

1
4

 πr2.

90
360





th


 =


1
4

 of the area

We  could  also  use

the  quarter-turn
symmetry  of  the  circle  to  understand  this
result.

D
Fig. 6.40: Area of a quarter
circular disc

Examining  the  above,  we  immediately  obtain  the  desired  formula

for a general sector:

Formula  for  the  area  of  a  sector  of  a  disc  in  terms  of  the  angle  it
subtends at the centre of the circle

If the arc is AB, and it subtends an angle of θ° at the centre O of the

circle (see Fig. 6.38), then the area of the sector is

π
r

2

×


θ
360



.

Note  how  we  have  used  the  rotational  symmetry  of  a  circle  in

deducing these formulas.

Related  to  a  sector,  there  is  a  part  of  the  circular  region  called  a
segment. A segment of a circle is the region bounded by an arc of the
circle and the chord joining the endpoints of the arc.

Chapter 6.indd   147
Chapter 6.indd   147

4/15/2026   3:04:19 PM
4/15/2026   3:04:19 PM

Measuring Space: Perimeter and Area148

ExErcisE sEt 6.3

Unless stated otherwise, use the approximation  22
7
  1.  Find the area of a sector of a circle with radius 7 cm if the angle of

 for π.

the sector is 60°.

  2.  Find the area of a quadrant of a circle whose circumference is 44 cm.

  3.  The  length  of  the  minute  hand  of  a  clock  is  7  cm.  Find  the  area

swept by the minute hand in 10 minutes.

  4.  A chord of a circle of radius 10 cm subtends 90° at the centre. Find
the area of the corresponding: (i) minor sector (that subtends 90°
at  the  centre),  and  (ii)  major  sector  (that  subtends  270°  at  the
centre). (Use π ≈ 3.14.)

  5.  A chord of a circle of radius 15 cm subtends an angle of 60° at the
centre of the circle. Find the areas of the corresponding minor and
major segments of the circle. (Use π ≈ 3.14 and  3 1 73⊕ .
 ≈ 1.73.)

  6.  A car has two wipers which do not overlap. Each wiper has a blade
of length 28 cm and sweeps through an angle of 120°. Find the total
area cleaned at each sweep of the blades.

 *7.  A  chord  of  a  circle  of  radius  r  subtends  an  angle  of  60°  at  the
centre of the circle. Show that the area of the corresponding minor

segment of the circle is equal to πr


2 1

6



−

3
4



 .


 *8.  An  equilateral  triangle  is  inscribed  in  a  circle  of  radius  r.  Show
that the ratio of the area of the triangle to the area of the circle is
equal to  3 3
4π

 ≈ 0.413.

 *9.  A square is inscribed in a circle of radius r. Show that the ratio of
 ≈ 0.637.

the area of the square to the area of the circle is equal to  2
π

 *10.  A hexagon is inscribed in a circle of radius r. Show that the ratio
of  the  area  of  the  hexagon  to  the  area  of  the  circle  is  equal  to
3 3
2π

  ≈  0.827.  Can  you  see  why  the  answer  is  exactly  twice  the

answer to Question 8?

Chapter 6.indd   148
Chapter 6.indd   148

4/15/2026   3:04:24 PM
4/15/2026   3:04:24 PM

Ganita Manjari | Grade 9 | Part IEnd-of-chaptEr ExErcisEs

149

In the problems below, unless stated otherwise, use the approximation
22
7

 for π.

1.  Identities

in  algebra  can  sometimes  be  shown  as  area

relationships. For example:

a

b

a

b

a2

ab

The  figure  shown  corresponds  to
the identity

(a + b)2 = a2 + 2ab + b2.

ab

b2

Do you see how?

Fig. 6.41: Area model of
an identity

Draw figures corresponding to the identities (a + b)(a – b) =

a2 – b2 and (a + b + c)2 = a2 + b2 + c2 + 2ab + 2bc + 2ca.

2.  An  isosceles  triangle  has  perimeter  40  cm;  the  equal  sides  are

15 cm each. Find the area of the triangle.

3.  An isosceles triangle has base 10 cm, and its area is 60 cm2. What

are the lengths of the equal sides?

4.  The area of a right-angled triangle is 54 sq. cm. One of its legs has

length 12 cm. Find its perimeter.

5.  The sides of a triangle are in the ratio 2: 3: 4, and its perimeter is

45 cm. Find its area.

6.  The sides of a triangle have lengths 7 cm, 24 cm, 25 cm. Find the

area of the triangle in two different ways.

7.  If the wheel of a bicycle has a diameter of 60 cm, find how far a
cyclist will have travelled after the wheel has rotated 100 times.

Chapter 6.indd   149
Chapter 6.indd   149

4/15/2026   3:04:24 PM
4/15/2026   3:04:24 PM

Measuring Space: Perimeter and Area

150

8.  Find  the  area  of  a  quadrant  of  a  circle  whose  circumference  is

66 cm.

9.  The wheel of a car has an outer radius of 28 cm. Calculate how
far the car travels after one complete turn of the wheel, and how
many times the wheel turns during a journey of 1 km.

  *10.  Two rectangles have the same area and the same perimeter. Does

this mean that they are congruent to each other?

  11.  You know that the area of a parallelogram is base × height. Using
this and the figure, show that the area of a trapezium is half the
sum of the parallel sides × height, i.e.,  1
2

(a + b)h.

a

b

h

Fig. 6.42: Trapezium: sides a and b, height h

  12.  By dividing a trapezium into two triangles show that its area is,
half  the  sum  of  the  parallel  sides  multiplied  by  the  height  (the
same formula as the one given above).

  13.  Show how we can use two identical copies of a trapezium to make
a parallelogram. How will this give us the formula for the area of
a trapezium?

  14.  Show that the area of a kite is half the product of its diagonals.

Show this: (i) using algebra, and (ii) using geometry.

  15.  Three problems about fitting congruent shapes together:

(i)  Rectangle ABCD has sides a, b, and rectangle PQRS has sides
2a, 2b. Show that PQRS has 4 times the area of ABCD. Does this
mean that 4 copies of rectangle ABCD will fit into rectangle
PQRS? Check and see!

Chapter 6.indd   150
Chapter 6.indd   150

4/15/2026   3:04:24 PM
4/15/2026   3:04:24 PM

Ganita Manjari | Grade 9 | Part I

151

(ii)  ∆ABC has sides a, b, c, and ∆PQR has sides 2a, 2b, 2c. Show
that ∆PQR has 4 times the area of ∆ABC. Does this mean that
4 copies of ∆ABC will fit into ∆PQR? Check and see!

(iii) ∆ABC has sides a, b, c, and ∆PQR has sides 3a, 3b, 3c. Show
that ∆PQR has 9 times the area of ∆ABC. Does this mean that
9 copies of ∆ABC will fit into ∆PQR? Check and see!

Fig. 6.43: What fraction of the
triangle is shaded?

Fig. 6.44: What fraction of the
square is shaded?

  *16.

  17.

Fig. 6.45: What fraction of
the rectangle is covered by
the circles?

Fig. 6.46: What fraction of
the rectangle is covered by
the circles?

  18.  Use the above to make a conjecture about the area occupied by
circles  fitted  into  a  rectangle  in  the  manner  shown.  Test  your
conjecture  for  particular  cases:  10  circles;  20  circles;  50  circles.
Then prove your conjecture!

  *19.

shows  nine
The  figure
rectangles  fitted
identical
together  to  make  a
large
rectangle  whose  area  is  72
cm2.  Find  the  perimeter  of
each small rectangle.

Fig. 6.47: Nine identical rectangles
stacked together

Chapter 6.indd   151
Chapter 6.indd   151

4/15/2026   3:04:24 PM
4/15/2026   3:04:24 PM

Measuring Space: Perimeter and Area

152

  *20.

  *21.

Fig. 6.48: Lines from a vertex to
the points of trisection of the
opposite side

B

A

Fig. 6.49: A quarter circle and two
semicircles

  *22.

2

2

Fig. 6.50

  *23.

B

BC = l

C

A

O

Fig. 6.51

Show  that  the  areas  of  the
shaded  blue  triangle  and  the
shaded red triangle are equal.

Find a way of cutting up the
blue triangle into some number
of  pieces  and  rearranging  the
pieces to cover the red triangle.

The figure shows a quarter circle
in  a  square.  Its  centre  is  at  one
vertex,  and  it  passes  through
two adjacent vertices. There are
two semicircles on two adjacent
sides  as  diameters.  They  create
the shaded regions A and B .

Show  that  A  and  B  have

equal area.

In  Fig.  6.50,  four  semicircles
have  been  drawn  within  the
given  square  whose  side  is
2  units.  The  centres  of  these
semicircles  are  the  midpoints
of  the  sides.  They  create  a
4-petalled  flower  (shown  in
blue).  Find  the  perimeter  and
the area of this flower.

In Fig. 6.51 we see two concentric
circles with a common centre O.
A  chord  BC  of  the  larger  circle
is  drawn,  touching  the  smaller
circle at A. The length of BC is l.
Show that the area of the green
region  enclosed  between  the
two circles is 1
 πl2.
4

Chapter 6.indd   152
Chapter 6.indd   152

4/15/2026   3:04:24 PM
4/15/2026   3:04:24 PM

Ganita Manjari | Grade 9 | Part I *24.  In  Fig.  6.52,  semicircles  have  been  drawn  on  all  the  sides  of  a
right-angled triangle as shown. Show that Area (A) + Area (B) = Area (C).

153

C

A

B

Fig. 6.52

D

Fig. 6.53: Two congruent circles,
 radius r

 *25.  Fig.  6.53  shows  two  circles  passing  through  each  other’s  centres.
Find the area of the region enclosed by the two circles in terms of
the common radius r.

*26.  In  Fig.  6.54,  we  see  three
triangles within a rectangle.

  The areas of the triangles are
A, B, C, as marked. Show that
the area of the rectangle is
+(
)
+(
2 A C B C
C

) .

A

C

B

Fig. 6.54

 *27.  In the figure we see two shaded regions formed by a quarter circle,

a semicircle, and a triangle.

E

B

F

D

A

O

Fig. 6.55

C

  Show that the areas of the two shaded regions are equal.

Chapter 6.indd   153
Chapter 6.indd   153

4/15/2026   3:04:27 PM
4/15/2026   3:04:27 PM

Measuring Space: Perimeter and Area

154

Chapter Summary

•  π is the constant circumference to diameter ratio for all circles,

and is approximately equal to 22
7
•  The circumference of a circle is given by C = 2πr, where r is the

 or 3.14.

radius of the circle.

•  The arc length of a circle is given by l = 2πr ×

central angle.

θ°
360° , where θ is the

•  The area of a triangle is given by A =

1
2

 base times height.

•  Heron’s formula for the area of a triangle in terms of its sides a, b, c:

area =  s s a s b s c
−
−

)(

)(

−

(

).

 where s = s

=

1
2

(

a b c
+ +

).

•  The area of a circle is given by A = πr2.

•  Estimates

for

Chongzhi:  π  ≈  355
113
1
= 4 (1 –
3

formula: π

 +

1
5

 –

1
7

 + …).

π:  Archimedes:

3 10
71
;  Āryabhaṭa:  π  ≈  3.1416;  Mādhava’s  exact

π

<

<

3

;

1
7

•  π is an irrational number.

•  The  area  of  a  sector  of  a  circle  is  given  by  area  =  πr2  ×

where θ is the central angle.

θ°
360°

,

•  Brahmagupta’s formula for the area of a cyclic quadrilateral in

terms of its sides a, b, c, d:

area

s a s b s c s d . where   s

=

1
2

(

a b c d
+ + +

)
 .

Chapter 6.indd   154
Chapter 6.indd   154

4/15/2026   3:04:27 PM
4/15/2026   3:04:27 PM

Ganita Manjari | Grade 9 | Part I

